>> I think the most important
message that I have is
to remember that you-- and I'm
speaking to you watching this
film--
you make a difference, you as
an individual make a difference.
What you do each day
actually is affecting what's
going on in the world each day.
So your life matters.
You matter.
And use your life wisely.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The Western
diet, unfortunately,
is associated with the
development of some pretty
serious diseases.
>> Heart disease, cancer,
diabetes, obesity--
it's like a tsunami.
>> Cardiovascular diseases are
the number one cause of death.
Around the globe, more
than 17 million people
die of a heart attack
or stroke per year.
The number of cancer cases
is rising dramatically.
One out of every four men and
one out of every five women
die of cancer.
Diabetes has also
become an epidemic,
and already one out of two
Europeans and Americans
is overweight.
>> The interesting thing is that
all experts would agree that
the cause of this tsunami
really is our lifestyle.
And the fascinating thing
is that the major driving
force within that lifestyle
creating these illnesses
is our dependence
on animal nutrition.
>> And I think this idea needs
to be conveyed to people that
there is a strong association
between the Western diet--
high in animal foods,
processed foods, protein, fat,
and so forth--
and diseases.
People have to know that
that really is true.
>> Never before have we been so
well informed about nutrition
in theory.
In practice, in
everyday life, we
succumb to mindless cravings.
We devour instant
meals, gobble cafeteria
fare, and stuff our
faces with fast food,
and practically always
contained in these products--
meat.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Despite all warnings, we
are eating more and more meat.
There is no day
without meat, no feast
without meat, no
break without meat.
It's a normal part of our
diets because it's tradition,
it's cheap, and
because it tastes good.
>> My diet for 65
years was the SAD Diet,
the Standard American Diet.
I eat meat and chicken
and fish and fowl
and lots of butter and
anything that tasted good.
>> In 2010, at the age of 66,
Sharon Kintz started to think
about her eating habits as the
result of a dramatic event.
>> At that time, I already had
been diagnosed with high blood
pressure.
So I was aware of that.
But having a heart attack was
a complete surprise to me.
The only symptoms that
I had leading up to that
was heaviness in my
arms, pain in my jaw,
and I would be tired,
more tired than usual.
>> This health nightmare put
Sharon Kintz in the intensive
care unit.
During the heart
catheterization,
it was determined that I had
a 100% blockage in one artery
and 65% in one and
75% in the other.
So there actually was very
little options open for me
other than open-heart surgery.
>> Caldwell B. Esselstyn is an
expert in the field of heart
disease, a well-renowned
surgeon and researcher and one
of the best doctors
in the United States.
Today, the 82-year-old directs
the Cardiovascular Prevention
and Reversal Program at the
Cleveland Clinic Wellness
Institute in Ohio.
Back in the 1980s, Dr.
Esselstyn had already
begun questioning the methods
for treating heart disease.
They only combated the
symptoms, but didn't get rid
of the cause.
Intensive research led
him to the conclusion
our cardiovascular diseases are
caused by our eating habits.
>> When we look at this
cause of heart disease,
let's not be confused to blame
it on genes or just blame it
on somebody's age or blame
it on the luck of the draw.
Heart disease is a
foodborne illness,
and we now know that every
time certain foods will
pass your lips, you will
further endanger and injure
the endothelial cell capacity
to make nitric oxide.
>> Endothelial cells are crucial
to our blood vessels and heart.
They line our blood
vessels and produce
protective nitric oxide.
>> And nitric oxide has these
marvelous functions of keeping
your blood flowing smoothly.
It's the strongest
vasodilator in the body.
It also protects you
from getting hypertension
because it keeps your artery
wall from getting stiff,
inflamed, or thickened.
And most importantly, a
plentiful, normal amount
of nitric oxide will
prevent you from ever
developing blockages or plaque.
>> Scientists know that
cardiovascular disease starts
with progressive damage
to the endothelial cells.
This is precisely where
our diets come in.
The excessive consumption of
animal-based or processed foods
damages our endothelial cells.
Regular consumption
of these products
increasingly diminishes the
protective nitric oxide supply
in our blood vessels.
This leads to inflammation
and a hardening and narrowing
of the blood vessels.
These can have life-threatening
consequences, like heart attack
or stroke, or cause
arteriosclerosis.
>> This is just trying to
demonstrate for you that once
you get this inflammatory--
>> Years of research and
personal experience have
provided Dr. Esselstyn with
conclusive evidence that
a plant-based diet cannot
only prevent the progression
of heart disease but can
also reverse its effects.
>> The first thing
is on the right--
>> Esselstyn has successfully
treated hundreds of patients
with this program.
It consists of a low-fat,
purely plant-based diet.
>> When you're willing to take
the time and have the patients
understand the science behind
this and they really realize
that they have caused this
disease by the foods that
they've eaten, they suddenly
realize that you are empowering
them as this locus of control
to halt their disease.
They don't have to depend upon
a cardiologist or an operation
or a drug that may have
significant side effects.
They are being empowered
to do this themselves.
>> With Dr. Esselstyn's
help, Sharon Kintz, too,
completely
restructured her diet,
doing away with all
animal products.
She turned down the heart
surgery recommended to her
by her doctors.
Sharon Kintz decided to
use food as medicine.
>> I was on it for four
weeks and the pain went away
in my arms, the pain
went away in my jaws,
and I had much more energy.
So I took Dr. Esselstyn's
program very seriously.
>> When Sharon Kintz
was first diagnosed,
she could hardly walk anymore.
And nearly two years after her
treatment with Dr. Esselstyn,
she is physically fit
again, and she has
fulfilled one of her dreams.
In 2012 at the age of
68, she successfully
took part in a half marathon
for the first time in her life.
>> I know people are
cramped for time,
but you're talking
about your health.
If you want to live
a long, healthy life
and be able to
contribute something,
then you have to take care of
your body in order to do that.
You have to, in my
opinion, eat plant based.
>> We also consume
too much milk.
And the availability of dairy
products continues to grow.
But do these products
actually agree with us?
After all, nearly 75% of
the world's population
and 20% of Europeans
are lactose intolerant--
in other words, unable to
properly digest dairy products.
Dairy products contain
no complex carbohydrates,
or roughage, and
very few vitamins.
Instead, they are full of
saturated fat, cholesterol,
and animal protein.
>> When we're young
and growing up,
everybody wants to try to feed
people dairy products and make
sure you have milk every day,
but the science really now is
at a point where that
cannot be sustained.
There is ample evidence
from wonderful investigators
like T. Colin Campbell who
clearly show that casein, which
is the major protein in milk,
is really one of the strongest
promoters of cancer.
>> T. Colin Campbell is a
world-renowned nutritional
scientist.
In a series of
experiments, he was
able to prove that
animal proteins-- casein
in particular-- promote all
stages of cancer growth.
In experiments, rats were
given carcinogenic substances.
Afterwards, half were fed
a 5% casein-enriched diet
and the other half 20%.
20% roughly corresponds
to the amount
consumed in Western diets.
With a 5% casein-enriched
diet, the animals
did not develop cancer.
With a 20% casein-enriched
diet, however, cancer growth
was stimulated significantly.
Professor Campbell
went a step further.
Every three weeks, he
altered the rats' diet.
>> So the next thing we did, we
did some studies to start out
with animals here and then let
the cancer start to grow with
20% casein, and then
we switched it to 5%.
It went off.
We gave the 20% back
again, came back again.
We put it on 5%, it came off.
So we could turn on and
turn off cancer development
just by switching the amount
of casein being consumed.
>> These findings are also
supported by evidence with
humans.
>> We also know that all the
saturated fat and the casein
and dairy helps to accelerate
and promote heart disease.
And then we have
this whole problem
of fractures in the elderly.
So here we have this problem of
increasing cancer, increasing
heart disease, and
increasing fracture--
not a good thing.
Dairy really should be out.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> And dairy also has--
and there's good
evidence for this.
It has some
allergenic properties.
It tends to be associated
with allergies,
either directly associated or
enhancing the allergies coming
from another source.
And so we see things like
in a case of teenage boys,
we get this acne.
They get his acne
sometimes, a skin problem.
A lot of that is due to
their consumption of dairy.
Stop dairy, it goes away.
Dairy's associated
with migrant headaches.
I know a lot of people have
these migraine headaches.
It's kind of an allergy
kind of thing as is acne.
It's kind of an
allergy kind of thing.
You stop that, it goes away.
And it's very fast.
And I used to say that
with great reluctance
because I was raised
on a dairy farm.
I grew up milking cows.
And then when I went away to
do my doctoral dissertation,
I actually did my dissertation
on the idea of promoting
more milk consumption.
So I'm not saying these rather
negative things about dairy
for any ideological reasons
or any personal reasons.
I'm saying in reference
to the evidence, the data.
That's what it shows.
>> The excessive consumption of
animal products, such as meat,
fish, dairy products, and eggs,
puts a strain on our bodies.
That was also what
Frankfurt-based physician
Lothar Wendt found
in his research.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> T. Colin Campbell arrived
at the same conclusion.
He has been at the cutting
edge of nutritional research
for more than 40 years,
and in the '80s and '90s,
he directed the
China-Cornell-Oxford Project,
better known as the China Study.
This is the most
comprehensive nutrition study
in the history of
biomedical research to date.
It confirmed Campbell's theory.
>> We tend to want
to consume protein,
which means we want
to consume meat,
because that supposedly
makes us strong.
It makes us healthy.
That's been an old
story for a long time.
But in reality, as we put more
and more protein, or meat,
into our diet, we see these
diseases start to appear.
>> The China Study as well
as numerous other studies
demonstrate one
thing above all--
the higher the consumption
of animal products,
the greater the frequency
of heart disease, cancer,
diabetes, and countless
other chronic diseases.
Even small amounts
of animal products
can have a negative
effect on our health.
The 53-year-old electrical
engineer Arthur Soteros also
became a victim of his diet--
excessive amounts of meat,
fish, and dairy products.
The consequences
caught up with him.
>> My first health issues
started about 20 some years
ago, about 20 years ago when I
was about 30, 32 years of age.
I was diagnosed with
type 2 diabetes.
About 10 years later,
propagated into heart disease.
My first encounter with
heart disease was at age 42.
What I exhibited
was just heartburn
turned out to be a blockage.
I went to the emergency room
and found out it was a blockage
and it required an
intervention and stent.
That was my first encounter.
>> A stent is an implant
designed to hold a vessel open.
Arthur Soteros needed to have
five such stents implanted.
He repeatedly suffered from
chest pain and a narrowing
of his blood vessels.
Finally, he needed double
coronary bypass surgery.
>> So I was sure that, after
doing the bypass surgery,
that I would be free and
clear of any heart issues
for at least upwards
to about 10 years.
That happened not to
be the case with me.
About a year into that,
I developed angina again
and what turned out not
then to be the vein graft
that they used in
my bypass surgery
had now blocked,
which then required
another stent and then,
a few months later,
another stent till the
frequency of those stents
then became just
two weeks apart.
>> The quickly returning vessel
occlusions baffled the doctors.
Soteros left the
hospital without hope.
>> I wept, and I cried like
a baby because I wasn't ready
to die.
And I cried out to
God for some options.
I think God saved my life.
I think it was God's mercy and
grace that actually gave me
options and set my hat
straight and pointed me
in the direction of plant based.
>> Through a member of
his church community,
Arthur Soteros learned
about Dr. Esselstyn and his
nutrition-based therapy.
He consulted the doctor,
and with his help,
he restructured his entire diet.
>> Within about 30 to
40 days from that point,
the angina that was experienced
again and the facial numbness
that I experienced during my
heart disease, it was gone.
And it was then, by following
this diet of going plant
based, within about four to--
I think was five months
from that point on when
I was doing a follow-up
with my cardiologists
and family physician who has
been monitoring my diabetes
said that my diabetes was gone.
And then I followed up that
same time in October of 2010
with my optometrist.
The prescription glasses
that I was wearing,
they looked at them
and said, why was I
wearing these things,
that all I needed
was just reading glasses.
So then with the
reversal of my diabetes,
my eyesight got better.
>> Arthur Soteros' heart
condition has disappeared.
His blood test
results are normal,
and he's been able to markedly
reduce his medication.
He also lost 20 kilograms
of excess body weight.
>> I feel better now at age
53 than I did at age 30.
>> Through the years,
I've had lots of students,
a lot of colleagues, plenty
of money to do all kinds
of research, and I've found out
that what I believed early was
wrong, that a diet that's
high in animal-based foods is
a problem.
A diet that's high in
processed food is a problem--
many different ways.
The only solution is a
whole-food, plant-based diet.
It's that clear.
And when people use that,
they not only prevent
future disease,
they actually are
able to cure existing disease
in people who have a disease.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> My wife, Karen, was diagnosed
with a serious kind of cancer,
stage three melanoma.
She refused to take
a chemotherapy.
She refused to have the surgery.
Then she got really
strict about her diet.
Now it's about nine years later.
No problem.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Plant-based foods give us
sufficient protein and healthy
fats.
They are rich in
complex carbohydrates
and antioxidants as well
as certain vitamins,
trace elements, and enzymes.
Plant-based foods contain what
humans need for a healthy diet.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> We have a big, big industry
that obviously supports
the livestock industry and
the egg industry and the dairy
industry.
It's just a huge, huge industry.
And unfortunately,
they have infiltrated
the academic community.
They've also infiltrated
the government.
And I know both because
I'm in academia.
That's been my entire life.
I see what they do.
Maybe they bring some money
to have some research done.
Also, in the policy area,
I spent about 20 years
in national policy development.
I was on expert panels
for the government,
and so we were doing things,
and we have committees.
And unfortunately, the
industry is so powerful
that they, in many cases,
are controlling who's
going to be on the committees.
They have too much money
for the politicians.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> I was actually raised
eating a typical diet,
and when I was about 22 years
old, I became a vegetarian.
And about five years
later when I was 27,
I went to a completely
plant-based diet,
and that's been 33 years now.
I'm 60 years old, and
it's been terrific.
I feel great.
I have a lot of energy.
And it's not just me.
People that I know who are also
longtime on a plant-based diet
are doing great as well.
>> [INAUDIBLE]
>> The seismic revolution in
health is just not ever going
to occur from inventing
another pill or a drug.
It's not going to come from
inventing another procedure
or an operation.
But the seismic
revolution in health
can come about when those of
us in the healing profession
are able to share
with the public what
is the lifestyle that
would protect them
from these chronic common
and killing diseases,
and the way we do
that really would be--
the top of the list
is to show them
about plant-based nutrition.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> The worldwide human
population will rise to nine
billion by the year 2050.
The global livestock population
will double to 50 billion.
It's going to get crowded.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> The growing consumption of
meat accelerates climate change
and species extinction.
It damages the soil,
water, and air,
and it spurs global starvation.
Appetizing, vacuum-packed
portions of meat
suggest none of this.
>> Most of the grain that's
being grown on the planet is
not growing for food
for human beings.
>> We're growing plenty
of food to feed everyone.
The problem is
we're feeding most
of that grain and the legumes,
like soybeans, to animals
while people are starving.
>> Worldwide, 1.8 billion
people are starving.
Every six seconds, a child
dies of malnutrition.
That's nearly 15,000 children
a day, a sign of poverty
not for the poor,
but for the rich.
>> Only 2% of the soya in the
United States is being eaten
by human beings.
About 70% goes for animal feed.
About 28% is going for biofuel,
diesel made from soya bean.
So it's meeting the
hunger of profits,
not the hunger of people.
Corn-- about 10% of
the corn in the world
is being eaten by humans.
Most of it is going
to torture animals.
I don't say feed animals
because animals did not
want to be fed with grain.
It doesn't suit their
digestive system.
So we are talking
about a system that
is creating hunger on the planet
in the name of feeding people.
>> Currently, one out of every
three seeds of grain harvested
in the world is
used as animal feed.
However, industrial
nations can no longer
produce these huge amounts
of fodder themselves.
Thus, Europe already imports
3/4 of its animal feed,
including 35 million
tons of soybeans alone,
mainly from South America.
The land used for
growing this feed
does not consist
of empty fields,
but valuable rainforests
forced to yield
to the monocultures of the
agricultural corporations.
>> One of the really shocking
things about this desire
of more and more people to eat
more and more meat and to eat
it more and more cheaply is the
awful effect that it's having
on the environment-- so whole
forests cleared to graze
livestock or to grow
grain to feed livestock,
and it's having a shocking
effect on the environment.
>> Because of this practice,
over the past two decades,
roughly 20% of the worldwide
largest rainforests
in the Amazon basin have
been destroyed forever.
Globally, deforestation
irreversibly
destroys an area the size of a
soccer field every two seconds.
And this, although
tropical rainforests
are among the Earth's
most valuable treasures,
nowhere else is there such
a rich diversity of species.
Moreover, these forests
stabilize the world's climate
as enormous reservoirs
of carbon dioxide.
That makes them more
valuable than meat.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Among the side effects of
the meat and dairy industry is
the production of methane gas.
It is primarily
generated in the stomachs
of ruminants like cattle.
Experts estimate that methane
is 25 times more detrimental
to the climate than CO2.
An even greater
concern than methane
is nitrous oxide, which
is nearly 300 times more
harmful to the climate than CO2.
It is released through the
use of synthetic fertilizers.
These and many other factors
make animal agriculture
a catalyst for climate change.
There are increased reports of
a new drought of the century
or a new flood of the century,
a new storm of the century,
or the progressive melting
of the glaciers in the poles.
Intensive animal farming doesn't
just stink to high heaven.
The excrement produced is
also polluting our soil.
For each kilogram
of meat produced,
roughly 6 kilograms of
slurry are generated.
Among other things,
slurry releases
ammonia, which poisons
the surrounding air
and causes long-term
damage to the soil.
Not only that, slurry
and its nitrates
also threaten our
drinking water of which
we need inordinate amounts
to make animal products.
For 1 kilogram of eggs,
3,300 liters are needed.
For 1 kilogram of chicken
meat, 3,900 liters.
For 1 kilogram of
pork, 4,800 liters.
For 1 kilogram of cheese,
a whopping 5,000 liters.
And an all-time high
of 15,500 liters
are needed to produce
1 kilogram of beef.
Plant production has a
much better track record.
Cultivating 1 kilogram of grain
requires 1,300 liters of water.
A farmer needs just 900 liters
for a kilogram of potatoes.
And a kilogram of apples
barely requires 700 liters
of precious water.
>> This entire meat industry
has today become a scandal
on the planet.
It should not exist in the
form in which it exists.
To force everyone into
destroying the Earth's
resources is a crime
against the Earth,
and it's a crime
against our bodies
because our bodies weren't
designed for this kind of diet.
Altogether, this is a recipe
for biological disaster,
biodiversity disaster, water
disaster, climate disaster,
health disaster.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> We were made to believe that
meat-based diets are superior
to plant-based diets, a lie
that has been exposed by medical
experts again and
again and again.
So what do we need to do?
We need to bring diversity
back into our farms.
We need to bring harmony
We have to celebrate diversity.
We have to work with farmers.
We have to know our farmers.
We have to start
realizing food is
what keeps the world's going.
Food is the energy of the world.
And we have to know
exactly where in that chain
we entered so that we don't do
more harm, we reduce the harm,
and, in the process,
we celebrate.
Food is life, and life is food.
>> Through its way of life,
the Langerhorst family in Upper
Austria exemplifies the practice
of farming without monocultures
and intensive animal husbandry.
It's been running a
vegan organic farm
with mixed cultivation
and permaculture
for more than 40 years.
The family grows vegetables,
fruit, berries, and nuts,
and avoids animal-based
and chemical fertilizers,
using green manure, plant-based
compost, rock flour, mulch,
and wood ash.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Nature shows us how
to solve our problems,
our personal problems and the
ones that involve the whole
world.
We just need to take action.
>> If we look at the
chances according to human
possibilities,
human intelligence,
human longing for
good, decent food,
I think the chances are
extremely high that we can all
live on a good, healthy,
organic, plant-based diet.
>> We love the notion
of romantic rural life,
happy animals and a healthy
environment well provided
for by Mother Nature.
It's really quite tempting to
get this meat on your plate.
But let's face reality.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Meat is less expensive
today than ever before,
a cheap product.
About 98% comes
from factory farms
where conditions are
beyond imagination.
Rarely in the past has the
term "industry" smacked
of a contempt for life
as it does to day.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Chickens are, by
nature, social, curious,
and intelligent animals.
But in the merciless
factory farm,
their lives are reduced to
short and joyless agony.
Chicks hatch not in the maternal
nest but in the incubator.
As soon as they can stand,
they are sorted, vaccinated,
packed up, and sent
to enormous feedlots.
In these animal prisons, they
reach slaughtering weight
in record time,
never seeing daylight
and under extremely
crowded conditions.
The normal life expectancy
of a chicken is 20 years.
Broilers is only
live up to 42 days.
During this brief lifespan, they
must gain roughly 2 kilograms.
No organism can withstand
such brutally rapid growth.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Some animals don't
survive this abnormal growth.
They can't drag themselves to
the feed and water troughs.
Others die of breeding-induced
cardiovascular diseases.
They succumb to stress or
fall victim to cannibalism.
All these are facts we are often
not aware of when eating meat
and which the meat lobby
is glad to keep concealed.
This is a mother sow.
This highly intelligent
and extremely sensitive
animal spends most of
its life in crates,
in cages hardly any
larger than themselves.
Instead of straw, they
lie on bare concrete.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> In nature, mother
sows build big,
soft nests for their offspring.
On factory farms, however,
this isn't possible.
The sows farrow in
gestation crates.
Confined, they are neither
able to protect nor care
for their young.
Not long after birth,
the piglets' tails
are docked as a precaution
against cannibalism.
In addition, male
piglets are castrated
by ripping out their testicles,
everything without pain relief
because an object's
pain doesn't matter.
Many animals are born
weak, handicapped, or sick.
It is not economical
to keep them alive.
Their fate-- an
undignified and cold death.
In the agonizing lack of
space, the immobilized mother
sows sometimes crush
their own offspring.
At the age of three
weeks, the piglets
are separated from their mother.
What follows now--
rearing and fattening.
Although pigs can
live up to 25 years,
they are slaughtered
as children, a mere six
months old.
They spend their brief
lives in cramped quarters.
EU norms require a minimum
area of just 0.75 square meters
for a porker of up
to 110 kilograms.
As many as 10% of the animals
do not survive these conditions.
In spite of this,
only a few people
are willing to do without
a pork chop or a schnitzel.
And cattle fare no better.
Many animals spend their
lives in narrow stalls,
the lucky ones in open pens.
Many, however, vegetate
in tether stalls.
One step forward,
one step backward--
that is all the freedom
of movement they have.
A life expectancy of 30 years--
that's something industrial-age
cattle can only dream of.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Infections are one of the
biggest problems in factory
farms.
The crowded conditions promote
the rapid spread of bacteria.
Overbreeding, a lack of hygiene,
and ignoring natural needs
put a huge burden on the
health of the animals.
The only antidote the
industrial meat producer knows
is the massive
administering of drugs.
Up to 3/4 of all antibiotics
end up in factory farms.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> The routine and improper use
of antibiotics in factory farms
presents a big health risk,
not just for the animals,
because more and more bacteria
strains are becoming resistant,
which renders
antibiotics ineffective.
If these antibody-resistant
bacteria infect humans,
we get sick too.
But often medication
no longer works.
Globally, more
than 700,000 people
die from infections because
the bacteria they have consumed
has become resistant
to antibiotics.
But the animals are not
only affected physically.
Industrial farming harms
them on all levels.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Having once seen pigs in
one of these intensive farms,
I was so shocked.
It's unbelievable to me that
people could treat animals
as though they're just
things without feelings.
And so many people say
to me, oh, but they're
being bred to eat, so it's OK.
But it's not OK.
>> There's a lot of animal
abuse in research, in education,
in circuses and rodeos and zoos.
But factory farming
is the worst.
If you summed up all the
pain that we cause animals,
the pain and suffering from
industrial food preparation
is far greater than
all of the pain
in any other venue combined.
So it's really the worst.
It brings out the
worst in human beings,
and it makes animals
suffer greatly.
They not only suffer
their own pain,
but they also feel the
pain of other animals
at these horrible factory farms.
>> Not only our meat consumption
promotes the suffering
of animals, but also our
growing demand for milk.
Cows are forced to achieve
higher and higher outputs.
In the '60s, a cow
produced an annual average
of 1,500 liters of milk.
Today, that amount has
risen to 10,000 and more.
>> I have quite a few vegetarian
friends who consume dairy
products, and they believe this
false idea that dairy products
are a benign animal product,
that there's no harm connected
to milk because
they figure, well,
once a cow starts giving
milk, she just gives milk,
and they don't realize that
cows can't give adequate amount
of milk for production
unless they're pregnant.
And cows have the same gestation
period as humans-- nine months.
They're pregnant nine
months, give birth.
Within 24 hours,
maximum 72 hours,
they take the calf
away from the cow
because you need the
milk for production.
You know, it's a
terrible business.
I mean, there is more
suffering in a glass of milk
than you can find in
just about anything.
The calves well bawl
and bawl and bawl,
and the cows will just--
they'll look for them.
>> Cows will often mourn their
children for days or weeks.
>> They do miss their calves.
The calves miss their mothers.
It's really-- it's a
heartbreaking thing to watch.
>> In factory farms, calves
are being born constantly.
But they serve no useful
purpose and are soon
put to different use.
>> Let's say a cow is
alive for four years.
She'll have four calves.
Just genetic roulette--
two are going to be male,
two are going to be female.
The two males are no use
to the dairy industry.
They're going to go to
auction within a day
to two or three
days after birth.
You only need one female
to replace the mom.
So three out of four calves
go to slaughter right
after they're born.
>> We know in our bones that
harming mothers who are just
giving birth to babies
and nursing those babies
and nurturing those babies
is something that is against
our own compassion and kindness.
And so when we're eating animal
foods, eating dairy products,
that's exactly what we're doing.
We are paying people to
impregnate animals, steal
their babies, steal their
milk, and then kill them.
>> I always say to people,
especially women, imagine that.
Imagine that you
was pregnant, you
got your breast
ready to give milk,
and somebody took
your baby away,
and then another animal
came and took your milk.
It's almost-- for
a human being, it's
almost impossible to imagine.
But that's what many
animals go through.
And some people
think, oh, goat's milk
is better than cow's milk.
Well, the goat is
also a living thing.
The goat also produce milk,
not for human consumption,
but for the consumption
of a little baby goat,
and that's who the
milk should go to.
>> People wonder
whether animals,
including farm animals,
have emotional lives,
and the science tells
us that they do.
If people read and understand
what Charles Darwin had
to say about evolution, he said
that the differences amongst
species are shades of
gray, not black and white.
So if we have something,
then they have it too,
they being other animals.
So the science tells us
that many animals, including
farm animals, have very rich
and deep emotional lives.
>> The main thing is
that these farm animals,
when you know them
as individuals,
they're just wonderful.
I mean, there's
nothing like hearing
the whicker of a horse
when you come and he's
pleased to see you
and the cows chewing
the cud and the sweet
breath that they
have out in the fields.
And pigs-- well, pigs are
as intelligent as dogs
and more intelligent than most.
And when I was a
little girl, I used
to want to have a
little troupe of pigs
and train them and
go to a circus.
Well, now I know
circuses are bad,
but when I was a little girl--
you know.
Pigs are amazing,
just incredible.
>> Good, good.
Come on.
Good, boy.
>> People want to think
that cows are stupid,
that they're dumb, that they're
slow and all they do is eat
grass.
No.
They have community.
They have social structures.
They babysit for each other.
They mourn for the
loss of loved ones.
And they're a community just
like any human community.
They just look different.
That's all.
That's the only difference.
They just look different.
We don't speak their language.
That's the only difference.
>> We know, for example, that
chickens display empathy.
They feel the pain
of other chickens.
We know that cows and
pigs are very smart.
They miss one another.
They love to be around friends.
Cows and pigs are
extremely intelligent.
They can learn
very complex tasks.
So I like to say that
the animals who we eat
are very smart and
they're very emotional.
They're not what we eat.
So if there's an animal on the
plate or at the end of a fork,
it's who's for
dinner, not what's
for dinner, because when
we use the word "who,"
we're referring to an animal
who has a very strong inner life
and subjective life.
So for example, when pigs
and cows and dogs and cats
and wolves play, it's very clear
that they enjoy themselves,
that they're feeling happiness.
They're feeling very gleeful.
They're feeling a
lot of pleasure.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Everyone is aware that
animals have to die if we want
to eat meat, but very few want
to know what actually takes
place in a slaughterhouse.
Slaughterhouses
have their reasons
for not welcoming visitors.
In large industrial
slaughterhouses,
pigs are often
stunned by machine.
An electric shock triggers
a kind of epileptic attack.
This leads to unconsciousness.
In smaller operations,
stunning by electric current
is generally done by hand
before the animals are
suspended from a conveyor
and their throats slashed.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> In large meat factories, gas
chambers are standard practice.
The pigs are herded
into a gondola
and lowered into a
chamber where they
are gassed with a mixture
of carbon dioxide and air,
leaving them unconscious.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Once they have been stunned,
the pigs' throats must be
quickly and properly
slashed, otherwise,
the animals wake up and land in
the cauldron of boiling water
fully conscious.
This is no uncommon occurrence
since the whole process
takes place so quickly.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> All pigs can meet this fate.
Animals from organic
farms are no exception.
Once it is cut into
pieces, the animal
has finally endured
all the agony
the industry has to offer.
Chickens are processed
fully automatically
and at a high speed.
On average, 10,000
animals per hour
can be stunned, killed,
cleaned, and cut into parts
in a modern slaughterhouse.
Europe's largest poultry
slaughterhouse is in Germany.
It can handle up to
27,000 animals an hour.
That's 432,000 chickens a day.
The slaughter of cattle starts
with a captive bolt stunner,
which has been standard
procedure for decades.
The animals are driven along
a chute into a narrow box.
Not every animal goes
to its death willingly.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Humans are creatures
with many contradictions.
What is especially paradoxical
is our relationship to animals.
We can adore a pet,
and, at the same time,
we let other animals be
killed without the slightest
compassion.
Dr. Melanie Joy calls
this phenomena carnism.
>> Carnism teaches us to
place animals in categories
in our minds.
Some animals we love.
Dogs and cats are our
companions, our family members,
our friends, for instance.
Other animals we eat.
Carnism teaches us to
see animals as objects.
So we learn to refer to
the turkey on our plate
as something rather
than someone.
And carnism teaches us to
see animals as abstractions,
as lacking in any individuality
or personality of their own
and, instead, simply as
abstract members of a group
about which we've made
generalized assumptions.
A pig is a pig, and
all pigs are the same.
>> Carnism, says Dr. Joy,
is a belief system intended
to prevent us from recognizing
the violence and cruelty
of the system behind
eating animals.
We suppress and deny.
We ignore our head and our
heart when it comes to animals
that we classify as edible.
>> Choosing one animal to eat
and one animal to be a pet is
just--
some people call it speciesism.
It's just-- it's
a kind of racism.
It's a kind of favoritism.
And it's a kind of just
following a particular culture.
Now, what we have
to do is we have
to build a culture
and traditions based
upon compassion.
>> The highest form of
living, the highest value,
is compassion.
And when there is compassion,
we maximize well-being.
After all, the word "wealth"
comes from well-being.
It did not mean money
in the hands of a few.
It meant well-being shared
across life spectrum.
>> I think once we admit that we
humans are not the only beings
with personalities,
minds, and feelings,
once we realize that we are
part of the animal kingdom,
then it becomes quite as
important how we treat animals,
all animals, as how
we treat each other.
And so only when we show respect
and consideration and concern
for other living
beings can we imagine
a world that's more
peaceful than the one today.
>> We are at a threshold where
across the world people are
seeking the liberation of
life from this stranglehold
of objectification, the view
that the Earth is dead matter
and our beings are just objects.
We have to rise in subject
to it, of an interconnected
subject to it.
No life is less important
than any other life,
and human beings are
definitely not the emperors
over the rest of life--
are just one strand
in that web of life.
>> I think the reason that
so many people don't change
their behavior is because
they feel, what's the use?
I'm just one person,
so what I do actually
can't make any difference,
and nor would it
make any difference
if it was just one.
But more and more
and more people
are coming to understand
what the problems are
and what they ought to be doing.
>> Never, ever think that one
person can't make a difference.
We tend to focus our energies
on looking for leaders,
say, like Martin Luther
King or Mahatma Gandhi.
But they were just one person.
They didn't set out in
life to be a leader,
and they were very
humble people.
It's just that circumstances in
history drew them to the front.
But if we're looking for
leaders, all we have to do
is go home and look in the
mirror because each one of us
can make a
difference, and we do.
It's just making a
conscious decision
that we are going to make
a difference in our lives.
We're not on this
planet for a long time,
so we need to do what
we can in the time we've
got to make a difference.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Every one of us
can make a difference.
Every one of us eats at least
two to three times a day.
And every act of
conscious eating,
of knowing what the
consequences of your eating
are, knowing what
you're eating is
an act of changing the world.
>> I think the most important
message that I have is
to remember that you-- and I'm
speaking to you watching this
film--
you make a difference.
You as an individual
make a difference.
What you do each day
actually is affecting what's
going on in the world each day.
So your life matters.
You matter.
And use your life work wisely.
[MUSIC PLAYING]